docs: SDK State Management (#2323)
GetStream/stream-chat-react: docusaurus/docs/React/guides/sdk-state-management.mdx

---
id: sdk-state-management
title: SDK State Management
---

Most of the application state which is the main driver behind the UI changes of our chat SDK lives within our LLC ([`StreamChat`](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-js)) - more specifically client and channel instances and is _NOT REACTIVE_ - our React SDK makes these states reactive by listening to the same events client does and copies it with the help of `useState` API after it has been changed.

This is how the SDK state pipeline looks like behind the scenes:

```txt
client attaches WS event listeners -> React SDK attaches WS event listeners -> WS event received -> client/channel instance updates its own state -> React SDK pulls the updated state and updates it locally
```

Optimistic updates - if applicable - are handled by the React SDK.

> TODO: link to optimistic update tutorial?

Reviewer: Not sure, if we should put optimistic state updates tutorial. Not sure whether we have some standardized approach to the topic, that could be documented.

  return <Channel channel={activeChannel}>{children}</Channel>;
};
```

Example with `setActiveChannel` function:

```tsx
import { useEffect } from 'react';
import { useCreateChatClient, useChatContext, Chat, Channel } from 'stream-chat-react';

const ActiveChannelSetter = ({ channelId, channelType }) => {
  const { client, setActiveChannel } = useChatContext();

  useEffect(() => {
    const channel = client.channel(channelId, channelType);
    setActiveChannel(channel);
  }, [channelType, channelId]);

  return null;
};

const App = () => {
  const client = useCreateChatClient(userData);

  if (!client) return <div>Loading...</div>;

  return (
    <Chat client={client}>
      <ActiveChannelSetter channelId='random' channelType='messaging' />
      <Channel>{/** ...other components... */}</Channel>
    </Chat>
  );
};
```

Afterwards - to access currently active channel you can use `useChatContext` hook as well from any component (or custom hook) which is either direct or indirect child of a Chat component:

```tsx
import { useChatContext } from 'stream-chat-react';

export const useActiveChannel = () => {
  const { channel } = useChatContext();

  return channel;
};
```

> Currently active [channel state](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-react/blob/master/src/context/ChannelStateContext.tsx#L36-L56) can be accessed through the [`ChannelStateContext`](../components/contexts/channel-state-context.mdx) with the help of the `useChannelStateContext` hook - meaning any component which is either direct or indirect child of the `Channel` component can access such state.

Reviewer: This is very funny that the same object can be accessed from 2 different contexts :)

Reviewer 2: I agree with @MartinCupela here, let's not even mention the `channel` in the `ChatContext` and stick with `ChannelStateContext` everywhere instead!

---
id: sdk-state-management
title: SDK State Management
---

> Most of the application state which is the main driver behind the UI changes of our chat SDK lives within our LLC ([`StreamChat`](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-js)) - more specifically client and channel instances and is _NOT REACTIVE_ - our React SDK makes these state stores reactive by listening to the same events client does and copies it with the help of `useState` API after it has been changed.

Reviewer 2: If I'm starting here, I probably don't even know what LLC means. Let's start with a less technical overview, and dive deeper later in the article?

This is how the SDK state pipeline looks like behind the scenes:

```txt
client attaches WS event listeners -> React SDK attaches WS event listeners -> WS event received -> client/channel instance updates its own state -> React SDK pulls the updated state and updates it locally

> ```

Reviewer 2: Can we make a nice chart here? I can help with the visual part if you need me to!

Optimistic updates - if applicable - are handled by the React SDK.

## Active Channel & Channel State

> Before you can access the _reactive_ channel state you'll need to make one of the available channels active either through the use of the [`ChannelList`](../components/core-components/channel-list.mdx) component which handles this for you ([default setup](../basics/getting-started.mdx#your-first-app-with-stream-chat-react)) or by passing the `channel` instance to a [`Channel`](../components/core-components/channel.mdx) component as a prop or lastly, by calling `setActiveChannel`.

Reviewer 2: I find longer lists like that easier to understand when they are broken up into multiple lines, e.g.:

> The reactive channel state is accessible when the channel is marked as active. The channel becomes active when
> 1. It's selected in the `ChannelList` component; if you're using our default setup, you probably already have `ChannelList` in your application.
> 2. It's passed to the `channel` prop of the `Channel` component.
> 3. It's explicitly marked as active by calling the `setActiveChannel` method on the client instance.

Reviewer 2: We should also link from `setActiveChannel` (if the method is documented somewhere :)

Reviewer 2: If you decide to go this way, you can also move the examples closer to the actual cases. Then it flows nicer: here's how you mark channel is active; the active channel lives in `ChannelStateContext`; here's how you access the context.

    </Chat>
  );
};
```

Afterwards - to access currently active channel you can use `useChatContext` hook as well from any component (or custom hook) which is either direct or indirect child of a Chat component:

```tsx
import { useChatContext } from 'stream-chat-react';

export const useActiveChannel = () => {
  const { channel } = useChatContext();

  return channel;
};
```

Currently active [channel state](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-react/blob/master/src/context/ChannelStateContext.tsx#L36-L56) can be accessed through the [`ChannelStateContext`](../components/contexts/channel-state-context.mdx) with the help of the `useChannelStateContext` hook - meaning any component which is either direct or indirect child of the `Channel` component can access such state.

The example bellow shows how to reach `members` property coming from the channel state:

```tsx
import { Channel, useChannelStateContext } from 'stream-chat-react';

const MembersCount = () => {
  const { members } = useChannelStateContext();

  return <div>{Object.keys(members).length}</div>;
};

const ChannelWrapper = () => (
  <Channel>
    <MembersCount />
  </Channel>
);
```

## Channel List State

> [`ChannelList`](../components/core-components/channel-list.mdx) component is a standalone component which (unsurprisingly) holds and manages list of channels. You can access loaded `channels` from [`ChannelListContext`](../components/contexts/channel-list-context.mdx) with the help of `useChannelListContext` hook.

Reviewer 2: Let's specifically mention that this context is only accessible from the `ChannelList` subcomponents (Preview, List, etc)

```tsx
import { ChannelList, ChannelPreviewMessenger } from 'stream-chat-react';
import type { ChannelListProps } from 'stream-chat-react';

const CustomPreviewUI = (props) => {
  const { channels } = useChannelListContext();

  return <ChannelPreviewMessenger {...props} />;
};

export const CustomChannelList = (props: ChannelListProps) => {
  return <ChannelList Preview={CustomPreviewUI} {...props} />;
};
```

## Conclusion

> This guide covers the biggest and most important state stores, see other React stateful contexts exported by our SDK for more information.

Reviewer 2: I think we should add at least one example of subscribing to the LLC events here, maybe as an advanced section. Otherwise it's weird that we concentrate so hard on the fact that the state is not reactive, but don't show how it works.

Author: I had a "to do" for this but decided against as I suspect we'd be opening an unnecessary Pandora's box for us. We have described how it works but as this is not a good pattern (at all) I'd rather just not provide a replicable source.

---
id: sdk-state-management
title: SDK State Management
---

Most of the application state which is the main driver behind the UI changes of our chat SDK lives within our low-level client (LLC) - [`StreamChat`](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-js) - more specifically client and channel instances and is **NOT REACTIVE** - our React SDK makes these state stores reactive by listening to the same events client does and copies it with the help of `useState` API after it has been changed. Optimistic updates - if applicable - are handled by and are local only to React SDK.

This is how the SDK state pipeline looks like behind the scenes:

```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram
> 
>   box Stream Chat Client
>     participant Client State
>     participant WS Client
>   end
> 
>   box Stream React SDK
>     participant Channel
>   end
> 
>   Client State->>WS Client: attaches listeners
>   Channel->>WS Client: attaches listeners
>   WS Client->>Client State: receives a message and triggers listeners
>   Client State->>Client State: updates state;
>   WS Client->>Channel: receives a message and triggers listeners
>   Channel->>Client State: reaches for updated client state
>   Channel->>Channel: updates state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sequenceDiagram

  box Stream Chat Client
    participant Client State
    participant WebSocket Client
  end

  box Stream React SDK
    participant UI Components
  end

  Client State->>WebSocket Client: attaches listeners to keep the state up-to-date
  UI Components->>WebSocket Client: attaches listeners to keep UI up-to-date
  WebSocket Client->>Client State: receives a message and triggers listeners
  Client State->>Client State: updates client state
  WebSocket Client->>UI Components: receives a message and triggers listeners
  UI Components->>Client State: reaches for updated client state
  UI Components->>UI Components: updates UI
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sequenceDiagram
  box Stream Chat Client
    participant Client State
    participant WebSocket Client
  end
  box Stream React SDK
    participant UI Components
  end
  Client State->>WebSocket Client: attaches listeners to keep the state up-to-date
  UI Components->>WebSocket Client: attaches listeners to keep UI up-to-date
  WebSocket Client->>Client State: receives a WebSocket message and triggers listeners
  Client State->>Client State: updates client state
  WebSocket Client->>UI Components: receives a WebSocket message and triggers listeners
  UI Components->>Client State: reaches for updated client state
  UI Components->>UI Components: updates UI
```
